***Modding: Creation through Play, Homo Ludens and The Basis for a Healthy Metaverse

Keywords: modding, modding culture, sharing culture, content creation, open-source, online culture, memes, game development, games, ludology, homo ludens, new babylon

Mods are user-made modifications to video games that are generally made available for free on hosting platforms, such as nexusmods.com. Community-made new environments, characters, objects and storylines, tools to create more mods, or to install and make them mesh well with one another… Modding has become an inevitable part of modern game culture. To hack and personalise one's gaming experience is an activity at the edge between game-making and game-playing, the ultimate love-letter to the medium by those who don't have the means to develop their own intricate gaming experiences, but use existing games as platforms to propel their own ideas.

In this memoir, I want to explore what it means that people build their own game using another game as a platform, specifically using Garry’s Mod as a case study. Garry’s Mod is a mod of Valve’s 2004 hit game Half-Life 2, which exposes the internal resources of the engine to the users, allowing extreme customization of the game experience. Maps, characters, entities, game systems and vehicles are customizable, creatable and downloadable by everyone, and in-game tools permit creation within the technical possibilities of the base game, such as posing characters, building contraptions with the game’s objects and enhancing them with wheels, thrusters, cameras, electronics, and even programming using mods.

To mod is also to blur the line between content creation and consumption, as games become much more of a community endeavour than a consumption product. As players become designers, we start to see a situation resembling Constant Nieuwenhuys’ dream for Homo Ludens, the Playing Man, in his New Babylon. Constant proposes a situationist, post-scarcity, world-spanning city, a baseline structure that would accommodate a poetic way of living through creativity and play, a way for Homo Faber to transform into Homo Ludens, Man making art with life. This theme is echoed in video games that allow a lot of player freedom and creativity, such as Garry’s Mod, where a common base platform is elaborated on by all to create situations, intrigues, other games and universes.

I will examine the similarities in Constant’s proposition and Garry’s Mod, trying to draw conclusions about the future of shared, community-built worlds, such as the fabled Metaverse, how they fit Constant’s idea of Homo Ludens and how they could learn from modding communities of the past twenty years and Constant’s work in urban planning. A universal virtual world could house utopia, dystopia, a combination of the two, but will most probably become the successor of what once was the American Mall. As citizens of the world, we should have a say in the politics and physicalities of this common new New World, and if we look at what Mark Zuckerberg’s vision of a Metaverse suggests, We the Techno-Serfs would be better off building our own.



***Introduction 4 pages
***Mods: What / Why / By Who/ How
What are mods ? Mods are user-created bits of content that get added to existing video games. They can range from a simple bug-fix or feature extension such as a colour change on a model to a full-on rework into another type of experience, so-called “total conversion” mods such as “Enderal: Forgotten Stories” for Skyrim, which features 10 hours of voiced dialogue. Modding springs from an admiration for the base game and a will to play more than what was included in the base package. There are two approaches to modding, either the developer supports it, or the community has to develop the tools themselves. Often, it is a mix of the two, where the tools given by the developers do not reach deep enough into the game engine’s architecture to satisfy the modding community’s ambitions.
***Garry’s Mod, Mod of Mods
***Source Engine and the Big-Bang of Modding
When, in 2004, Valve released the game Half-Life 2, it came with a map editor that people could use to create levels, new game systems and even standalone games. This enabled players to create new games using a state-of-the-art game engine. Garry’s Mod is one of these new games, starting as a humble toy where you could use some features of the engine, such as rope creation, while in game, it soon became a fully-fledged game and game platform, with support for mods and alternative game modes being added as years and versions came by.
People could now add their own custom content to the game, such as weapons, new characters, levels, tools, vehicles and most importantly game modes, like zombie survival, sled building and racing, hide and seek and much more. Now, this was not simply a game, but a game of games, where through coding and the addition of content you could make your own game within the framework of this one, one step farther from the base game. This led to the creation of many roleplaying communities, whether they be realistic or based in a fictional setting.
*
Up until the early 2010s, modding required effort on the part of the modder, and sometimes external help. When someone wants to add a mod to their games, and they have no idea how to do so themselves, they often asked around for help from other players in order to find out what needs doing in order for their mod to work correctly with whatever version of the game they are running, and then to keep their installation working as the game receives updates which may break custom functionalities added by mods.

The problem with the old method is that it's very difficult for those who aren't familiar with computers in general and just want to add content to their game. You often had to open the directory of the game, sometimes even its files to replace and or add custom content on top of what the developers placed there. Some, like Bethesda or Id, started supporting mods pretty early on though. Many people ended up having trouble adding their own mods because they don't know what exactly needs doing in order for them all to work together properly. A lot of effort could, and still can, be put into making sure everything works correctly once you've added mods, even more so if you’re adding so much of them the base game is barely recognisable. 

A better way would be if someone could simply download one or more pre-made mods which contain all of the necessary files, and installs them automatically, also supporting seamless uninstallation and update functions. And so, through the years, as the experience of installing mods was optimised, came to be the Steam Workshop. Steam is an online video game marketplace run by Valve and the Workshop is a platform through which users can share and automatically install mods, in contrast to the old-fashioned way of downloading files on a site and installing them manually. This further streamlined the way people could arrange these different mods into new experiences, offering the role of curator to whoever had the means to host a game server.
***Homo Ludens
 Homo ludens is a Latin phrase meaning “playful man”. It refers to the way in which human beings play and engage with their environment, rather than being purely driven by survival or self-interest. Johan Huizinga proposes the concept of Homo Ludens in his 1938 book Homo Ludens, an evolution of Homo Faber, man who creates, into man who plays. The concepts of the Metaverse and of Homo Ludens fit well together: people can use the metaverse to explore their surroundings, and then return to the real world where they can interact with other players using their avatar.

Constant then extends this notion, hypothesising that Homo Ludens would need a ludic environment to exist and theorising this space in his body of work titled New Babylon.
He proposes a sprawling city made up of large, connected spaces, hanging above the ground, where humans could engage in all sorts of playful or theatrical activities in a situationist ideal where people wander and are free to make things happen.

Hideo Kojima is a Japanese game designer. He uses the term Homo Ludens to describe a new species of humans that his company would cater to. This reasoning has come from the observation of players as a whole, how games have given us a way to experience narratives and universes unlike previous mediums. The word immersion is often used to describe the gaming experience and rightly so because it is the medium through which you can most get under the skin of the protagonist and directly impact the world in which narration happens. As opposed to books and movies, excluding Choose your own Adventure books, every game is personalised with enough simulation to be chaotic, and thus indeterminable. This doesn’t mean however that there will be very significant differences in the story for example, as most narratology based games 
***Homo Faber, Homo Ludens & Constant Nieuwenhuys’ New Babylon 8 pages
***Post-Scarcity Spaces
***How Homo Faber came to be
Homo Faber was needed in the past to overcome nature and put in place the foundations of our modern world. Thus came Homo Faber, the “toolmaking man” in the words of Benjamin Franklin, a representation of industrious man as a tool maker, a shaper of environments, an architect of the natural world. [This distinction between Homo Faber and Homo Ludens also reminds the distinction between poiesis and praxis, a dichotomy proposed by Aristotle, where poiesis is that which serves a practical purpose, has a defined beginning, an end and a measurable outcome, for example manual labour and craftsmanship, and praxis is an action that is done for the action itself, such as singing.] But Homo Faber also came to be because of basic material needs: the human condition is such that our bodies are constantly in a state of lacking, either too warm, too cold, hungry, sad, dissatisfied and so on, outlining the need for a nurturing, safe and more or less fulfilling environment, one that came about thanks to Homo Faber.
***New Babylon, Situationism & Game Servers
By translating real life into virtual places, a crucial shift happens, a shift in the material, “hardware”, requirements for the ideological, “software”, goals. Where a hockey player has to have a whole dedicated space with an infrastructure to engage in his sport, a video game player only has to have one machine to engage in a world of possibility, even if it requires an even bigger infrastructure, this one is hidden to the user, hidden behind buzzwords like the cloud. Then again, it is but a measurable shift and not a total conversion: while it enables us to fake almost everything visually, not everybody is equal when it comes to the equipment they use to access this simulation, and so a class struggle in a way can be found in the medium of video games.
Take the app VR Chat for example. It allows its users to engage in purely social activities in virtual spaces, but they are not equal in respect to how they interact with this world and one another. While a wealthy player might enjoy a high-quality, lag-free rendering of the world on his 800$ VR headset and 2000$ computer, additional sensors tracking his limbs and hands and face, his poorer counterpart might play using an old, hand-me-down computer only capable of offering a mediocre, laggy, flatscreen experience.
So, it is found that while we may presuppose a great egalitarian shift in the way the world is moving online, it must be reminded that those with better microphones, more accurate and well-functioning experiences are still propped up socially and in other ways by their wealth and that the metaverse can be nothing but an illusion of a post-scarcity society, because this illusion is still maintained through a capitalist mean of exploitation, distribution and accumulation of wealth.
Though the reality is less than rosy, the ideal of Constant’s New Babylon still shine through what could be in the future, a place where Homo Ludens could live and thrive, where a modular architecture serves as a platform for humans to play and create situations in, transitioning from sedentary workers to nomad animals of joy, supported by a post-scarcity economy where work is entirely mechanical and thus optional.
The first step to build a “homo ludens platform” would be creating an open source project that allows users to create avatars and environments called ‘rooms’. These rooms could hosted on servers owned by the creators of the rooms, and could range from a typical room-sized space to a whole procedurally generated and thus infinite environment. Anyone who wants to build a room should be able to do so without having any technical knowledge – all they need is creativity, and assets from an online, common repository of resources. Once you have created your room, you should be able to host it on service platforms such as Facebook or Twitter, or even can host it yourself on your own server instead of relying on someone else doing it for you, thus enabling a “mesh”, a “web” of rooms that only depends on an open standard and not a centralised aggregated power. You should also be able set up permissions so that only certain users may enter your room at any one time; some communities could have rules about what type of content should be posted, some spaces might allow swearing but not nudity whilst others don’t allow either etc. There are no limits but those of the physical hardware: all sorts of different types of interactive experiences could exist within these spaces including games, art galleries, nightclubs, places to be social. You could even make money from sharing your space by displaying ads or charging for entry.
***The Metaverse as the new New World and its possibilities
With virtual worlds, we have a new frontier, a new common space of possibilities, open to everyone with an internet connection. And so, we can make almost anything happen inside of it, from the vulgar, to the silly, the cruel, the fascinating, the joyful, the contemplative. 
What we need to do this is a free platform, one that everyone can host or participate in, use, modify or create.

***Virtual worlds as a framework for Utopia
Virtual worlds are an interesting platform for sociopolitical experiments. Their flexibility and totalitarian control over their users make for a very easy space to set up forms of governance into, even more so that they require a limited amount of physical resources to happen and that algorithmic justice is way more precise and absolute than its classic, real world counterpart. A large portion of humans have access to digital terminals, it is only a matter of their capabilities and how they connect together that defines the aspect of the metaverse and its governance. Ideally, this would mean a flexible, decentralised, organic, peer-to-peer network where anyone can open their own space and design it according to their own desires and needs, while being a part of a global social community. This, in turn, would be a beautiful enactment of Constant’s New Babylon.
*** … and how easily they can slip into Dystopia
We should be wary of what Meta and other centralised virtual world endeavours want to do with us, our data and ultimately our lives; if we are to live part of them in metaverses, we should have more control over how our data is used and how our behaviour is modelled and controlled by algorithms, dark patterns and so on, especially given the increased sensorial intensity of a VR experience or the lesser but still significant one that a “simple” flatscreen virtual world can offer, without even speaking about social media. Throw in monetization of user-created content via taxing and you have a perfect new economic model for Meta, one like the children-targeted game Roblox, where the designers and users are both exploited by the system through the ceaseless overtaxation of trade. There is also an issue with artificial item rarity, important to think of as NFTs become a viable form of commerce. Colossal sums of money are exchanged and moved for them, further fueling a virtual, euphemized economy where instead of offering usable content as part of the experience, the users are relentlessly targeted by premium offers that they could enjoy and partake in, if only they paid a little more virtual money (that you must buy with real cash, or sometimes painstakingly earn through tens of hours of play). 
This form of monetization has proven its efficiency in the world of video games, with some so-called free-to-play games being rebranded by the community as pay-to-win. This can be seen as part of a larger shift in the software industry, where the paradigm now is software-as-a-service.
Now, take Constant’s ideal of a New Babylon for Homo Ludens. It could easily be replicated except for the post-scarcity part: humans could let the real world totally fall behind - only engaging with it as one would a coal mine, as brilliantly put by comedian Bo Burnham, and concentrate on their “much more real” digital existences since those are less limited by the oppressions of capitalism and other real world tragedies. Also, since now people are living and consuming (in) a digital world filled with virtual things to use explore and do, they don’t need as much material goods that they would have wanted otherwise, making it possible to take material value out of the individual’s life to replace it with digital value, which is much easier to control and produce.
***Homo Ludens & Homo Faber
***Players are, or should be, Creators
Players have generally always been consumers, and until relatively recently the idea that video games can be considered as art has been widely rejected. How couldn’t it be, when one look at the figureheads of the video game industry sufficed to establish it as a violence-peddling, low-brow entertainment for the masses. This image of the gamer as an avid consumer of action-based entertainment is also how most major developers have crafted gaming experiences, not as works of art and culture to be experienced but as products to be shipped as soon as possible to as many people as possible for a maximised profit. 
But players are, or should be, creators. Games are in their essence about creation, be it of rules, strategies, or internal storytelling. They should enable everyone to create new experiences, or at least to tailor their experience of the game so that it becomes an expression and not a procedure, again opposing praxis to poiesis, so that we can put the experience above the win.
***The Social Function of Play by Johan Huizinga
Huizinga, in Homo Ludens: essay on the social nature of play, theories that playing has benefits, both to the individual and the community. Through play we develop and maintain skills that are useful in the real world, we learn information and form social bonds that affect the world outside of this area of play.
***The Tangibility of Play, Virtual Objects and the Magic Circle as described by Huizinga
Huizinga also proposes the concept of the Magic Circle, a barrier in time and space through which we enter the space of the game, where normal logic and rules are superseded by those of the game, changing the space itself into a space of ritual. The social implications are huge for the metaverse, as it is a type of game, of ritual, of, in the words of science-fiction writer William Gibson describing cyberspace, consensual hallucination.
As Samuel Taylor Coleridge puts it in his 1817 Biographia Literaria, it is a willing suspension of disbelief that allows us to enter these fictional universes, be they literary or digital. This suspension, this moment where simulation takes over the importance of reality and makes us accept the experience of the virtual as having its own form of reality, being possible, tangible, not only a folly of the mind but something that we can emotionally and rationally attach and relate to, is what makes common virtual worlds possible. We could consider it as real as reality, and we should, because its lack of a physical existence doesn’t make it less real since it is rooted in a commonly agreed upon framework.
Because of this, the economy of virtual goods is set to boom. For example, a 650 thousand dollar yacht, The Metaflower, has been sold by the group Republic Realm inside the The Sandbox metaverse. However, time will tell whether these types of goods can ever be truly unique and valuable, because as opposed to a real boat, this one could be functionally copied by hackers or replicated in a legitimate way and sold for less or even distributed for free. What I think makes these items unique, for now, is only an agreement between the owners of the metaverse and the people creating their content that it is unique and special. As goes the old argument for digital piracy, digital goods can hardly be considered stolen when they are copied.
***Postmodernism, pop culture and Frederic Jameson’s Spectacle of Broken Signifier
Frederic Jameson proposes that late-stage capitalism uses and abuses symbols commercially until they lose their meaning.
	***Let creativity, user expression, culture take the wheel
***Memes & Internet Culture
Internet culture is self-referential, it evolves on its own, apart from regular culture, while at the same time being globally interlinked and self-sustaining. This means that any virtual space can be a part of this self-referential culture, as long as they are defined by and create an accessible culture of their own.
Modular video games are a perfect platform for the creation of this culture, since they allow personnalisation to the extreme, enabling a very high feedback between community of creators and 
***Game Servers & Social Microcosms
A game server, in Garry’s Mod, can be thought of as a microcosm of play with its own administration, content, rules and game design. Through the curation and creation of a particular set of mods, the play experience can be tailored to the server owner’s desires, within the limits of the game engine of course. Social microcosms form in these small groups that play together in one world and share their experiences of this world. They have their own rules and customs when playing together.
***Sharing Culture & Open Source Software
Open source software is a development model where the software code is available to everyone, and anyone can modify it. This means that you don't need to pay for the software, but instead could contribute your time and effort into improving it. The goal of open source is to increase the amount of people who use or contribute to the project, which implies a difference with traditional software: its users are also its creators, which makes for better (or obscure) usability.
***Monetization
Mods being historically based in a sharing economy, it came out as weird when Bethesda Softworks, the creators of the game Skyrim, added a shop for commercial mods. There was a strong community push-back, with arguments that mods have always been passion projects by amateur developers in their free time, while having options for players to donate to their favorite mod authors and even using crowdsourcing platforms such as Patreon to support their development, splitting down game development even more into smaller units of content production in a way. It’s also an argument that could be said, that in general in mods, creators have an incentive not only financially but also socially profit from these products, on top of also gaining prestige within communities by being seen as part of some elite group of leaders of the will of the players, whereas those in the game studios could be seen as developing mostly for a financial incentive, even more so when taking into consideration the weight of the will of the investors in major productions, where management is often seen as tyrannical and developers are often overworked.
***Conclusion 4 pages
***The Metaverse shouldn’t be Facebook 2.0
 The Metaverse should be a decentralised virtual space, not Facebook 2.0, but the next generation of social media and communication platforms that can be used by all users without any restrictions or censorship imposed by an external entity like Facebook.

Why? Because in the current model of social media, everything is centralised and controlled by one company (Alphabet, Apple, Meta, Amazon) which has direct access to your data, privacy settings and totalitarian content controls. The only way to avoid this control is to use alternative services where you benefit from decentralisation but still keep your own data private. However, these services are sparser, sometimes less easy to use for most people. This is why we need a metaverse that is effectively made of standards, like the traditional web: any one part of the metaverse can interact with any other, unrestricted by platform rules, like hyperlinks link arbitrary web pages together. This is the metaverse we need, and it's the metaverse that will come from open standards.
The way to get there is through a process of evolution. We don't need to start with a single standard; we can start with many standards, each one addressing some part of the problem but intermeshing with the other, automatically resolving conflicts in the patchwork of different, decentralised elements that come together into one single virtual space.


***Creators, not users
We need to stop being users and start being creators. The social media revolution has brought about a new way of communicating. It is not just about sharing information, it is also about creating content and influencing others to do the same. The internet has changed the way we communicate with each other, and this shift in communication has given birth to a new form of creativity that was never seen before. Social media allows us to create content and share it with our friends or followers on various platforms, and this creates an opportunity for people who are passionate about their work and have something interesting to say or show to get noticed by millions of people all over the world.

With the metaverse, we need even more creation. We need people to be playful architects of their own spaces, composing together situations, mini-games and experiences to play in together, to share and to take inspiration from. As such, we create a parallel world of free creation, where culture evolves faster because of a lack of physical constraints. But, for this to truly bloom in all its potential, we need to consider people as creators, not users. It is a question of relationship to the people of the metaverse, we should empower them, not try to make the most money possible from them until every interaction they have in the metaverse implicates a monetary interest in the background and every ounce of trust in the platform is eroded, like Facebook has done to its users in the past years. The Metaverse is the new frontier of communication, and we need to create it together. It will be a place where people can communicate with each other and create and experience content together, having the potential to become a global platform for creativity, as well as an open source tool that allows us all to collaborate on projects in real time, regardless of geographical boundaries like the Internet allows us to do today, but with an increased impression of presence and persistence, as those universes will not be simple interfaces of communication but true spaces we will adorn and shape with our presence. We must not only think about how to build this platform but also how we want it to evolve over time.


***Garry’s Mod, a proto-metaverse
Garry’s mod, as well as other games like it such as Second Life, have been an early example of a metaverse. In this document, I have tried to show that whatever this game has been, the good and the bad, could be considered a better metaverse than whatever Meta is cooking up.

With its openness to any additional content and the possibility to create microcosms with their own rules, Garry's Mod is a perfect figure of an open proto-metaverse.
A metaverse of its own kind, with a flexible architecture. This is why it has been so hard to classify as a game, it is not a game in the traditional sense because it doesn’t have a goal or an end, it barely has a set of standard, base content to itself that can be experienced, borrowing most of its infrastructure from Half-Life 2. It doesn’t have a world to explore. It could be called “a game without rules” or a “sandbox” type of gaming experience, but I think that this would be too limiting. In the end, it’s an open platform for other people to build upon, a piece of software and socially established communities to join and build upon. I think that is what led to its success, and it is a model that companies such as Meta should replicate: provide the platform, not the content. Let people own and host their own spaces using your tools, this way you are not the provider of content and can offer your users more freedom while for example not being entirely responsible for the crimes that could be committed on your platform, since it would be more a set of industry standards than a private service. I think that this is what makes Garry’s Mod a metaverse. It has been an example of how to build one from scratch, and it is not bound by any particular rules or goals. It has shown that you can create a metaverse with your own rules and content, but still be open for other people to use it as well.

So, in the end, what we need is an infrastructure of platforms with a reach and openness similar to Garry’s mod. Enabling users to create, share, and live in their dreamscapes, shaping them using a spectrum of creation tools that go from extremely simple to extremely complicated. We mustn’t limit that which is potentially infinite by the financial values of our old world of dust and blood, we should propel it to become a forum of joy and thought and culture and expression, and ultimately a New Babylon where humanity can exist as Homo Ludens.

***Bibliographie

Homo Ludens, Johan Huizinga, 1938

Constant's New Babylon: The Hyper-Architecture of Desire,Mark Wigley, 1998

Modding as a basis for developing game systems, Walt Scacchi, 2011

User Created Content, Raph Koster, 2006

Players Unleashed! Modding The Sims and the Culture of Gaming, Tanja Sihvonen, 2011

A Game Made From Other Games: Actions and Entities in Garry’s Mod, Peter Nelson, 2017

View of computer game mods, modders, modding, and the mod scene, first monday, 2010

Fooling the user? Modding in the video game industry, Merlin Münch, 2013

Private Server, Lonely World, Dante Pettapiece, 2021


—-----------------------------

Rester bien sur le sujet Homo Faber -> Homo Ludens
Amener concept espace 3d, pas le réaliser

